EXPLAINING CONFLICTS IN DR CONGO
FROM INFRASTRUCTURE PERSPECTIVE
© 2019 E. KIRILLOV
For more than twenty years the Democratic Republic of Congo has been experiencing bloody conflicts which have resulted in
millions of deaths. The intervention of international community had a limited success and violence continues to date. Despite
abundance of academic literature related to the theme, there are very few papers which employ quantitative research to explain this
violence. Furthermore, there has not been any research which illustrated conflicts in the country from the perspective of what is called
infrastructural violence. The article aims to fill this gap and prove that infrastructural deficiencies are among the primary
contributors to the violence in the DRC. The paper employs results of quantitative research and personal experiences of the author
(three years as part of the UN mission in the country) to support its theoretical assumptions. The article might be very informative
and helpful for the personnel of international organizations, the DRC Government and its donors. It might also be interesting for a
broad circle of researchers from such areas as African, conflict and peace studies. 
Keywords: DRC, Congo, conflict, violence, infrastructure
The Democratic Republic of Congo is seen by
many as a vivid example of a failed state. Since its
independence from Belgium in 1960, the country
suffered  conflicts  on  regional,  national  and  local
levels. The Second Congo War, which ended in 2003,
resulted in more than 5 million deaths and became
the bloodiest conflict since WWII [1; 13, p. 40].
In spite of the progress in restoration of peace since
international pressure on belligerents, withdrawal of
foreign troops and massive deployment of UN forces
(MONUC/MONUSCO), the country continues to
experience high rates of violence.
Since  2003,  the  country  has  been  suffering  a
series of provincial scale conflicts. Starting in 2004,
Nord-Kivu and  Sud-Kivu provinces  are  subject  to
waves  of  fighting  between  different  armed  groups,
fighting  of  them  against  the  government  as  well  as
infighting.  Ituri  conflict,  though  in  a  lesser  scale,
continues  its  being  since  2003.  Katangese
secessionist  movements  disbanded  themselves  only
in  2016.  Lord’s  Resistance  Army  (LRA) has  been
being active in Bas-Uele and Haute-Uele provinces
over a decade. Starting in 2013, clashes between Twa
pygmies and Bantu tribes have been ongoing mostly
in Tanganyika province. They resulted in thousands
of deaths [3] and more than 650 000 displaced [11].
Relatively  new  rebellion  named  Kamwina  Nsapu
erupted  in  Grand  Kasai region  in  2016.  Despite
absence  of  centralised  organization  and  clear
political  program,  the  rebellion  affected  different
provinces  and  caused  more  than  5000  deaths  [19].
Meanwhile,  it  seems  that  these  spots  of  violence
generate  and  spread  instability  further  as
neighbouring  to  conflict  zones  territories  become
affected by violence as well.
As it is seen, the feature of the current state of
conflict in the DRC in general is that there is no
conflict in its traditional meaning. There is no strong
enough active armed force or an alliance of forces
with  any  political  ambitions  of  country-scale  to
challenge the dominance of the current regime of
power.  None  of  cities  or  towns  has  been  under
control  of  an  armed  group  in  recent  years.
Nevertheless,  activities  of  a  multitude  of  outlaw
groups  have  been  causing  casualties  and  other
deplorable  effects  comparable  to  a  conventional
conflict. This asymmetric war is happening contrary
to the efforts of international community aimed at
stabilizing the situation. The country accommodates
the biggest UN mission and force in the world. This
raises  the  question  whether  the  country’s
government and international actors are addressing
the root causes of the country’s conflicts or they are
too engulfed with curing ‘disease symptoms’.
The existing academic literature explaining the
conflicts in the country has mostly two flaws. Firstly,
it almost does not employ quantitative research. This
can be partially explained by absence of reliable
statistics mostly in all spheres of the country. This, in
turn, provokes the second problem - an obsession
with conflict explanations which do not require a
substantial  statistical  data  to  support  their
assumptions.  The  field  is  flooded  with  theories
proposing  different  descriptive  explanations  of
violence  in  the  DRC  or  its  parts:  political
disagreements  [8];  autochthony,  tribalism  and
Evgenii N. KIRILLOV, Independent Researcher, Military Observer in the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (evgeniikirillov85@gmail.com)
44 АЗИЯ И АФРИКА сегодня№ 8 ● 2019
regional nationalism [7; 12; 16]; unfair distribution of
national  income  [5];  ‘conflict  minerals’  [6]  and
corrupt power-sharing practices [15].
The current paper does not deny the mentioned
factors as contributors to violence. Nonetheless, it
argues that country’s conflicts these days are mostly
caused by socio-economic reasons, rather than by
those  from  other  domains.  The  violence  in  the
country collocates with degradation of infrastructure
since the country got its independence in 1960. By
late  2013,  there  were  fewer  than  31 000 km  of
operational roads (mostly located in Kinshasa, Bas-
Congo, and southern Katanga regions), down from
145 000 km of roads in 1959 [14, p. 16]. As per 2019
the changes were insignificant. 
As it is seen from  the Map, the vast majority of
violent occurrences are taking place in areas with
poor  road  system  and  isolated  from  the  biggest
natural  transport  artery  -  Congo  River  and  its
tributaries.
This  article  argues  that  it  is  infrastructure
deficiencies, including also those related to education
and healthcare systems, which lead to violence, at
least  on  basic,  territorial  level.  Infrastructure
deficiencies preserve backward economic model and
society structure which, in turn, cause demographic
pressures. These pressures in conditions of organised
along bloodlines society and weak state performance
create a breeding ground for existence of armed
groups. Generated by armed groups violence, in turn,
Map. Transport capacity and armed groups of the DRC.
Source: UN maps, author's modifications.
aggravates all segments of the mentioned problem
chain and adds recursion to negative socio-economic
processes.
The  current  paper  starts  with  conceptual
framework  which  defines  mechanisms  of
infrastructure and violence interaction in the DRC.
Theoretical propositions are also formulated in that
part. After, there is presented research project aimed
at  gaining  required  statistics  to  support  the
theoretical  propositions.  The  formed  up  by  the
research statistics about infrastructure and violence
in the DRC is analyzed thereafter to support the
propositions. Conclusion defines strong and weak
parts of the paper and sets directions for further
endeavours on the issue.
DEFINING MECHANISMS OF INFRASTRUCTURE
AND VIOLENCE INTERACTION
Infrastructure and violence interact at territory
(fr. territoire)  level  in  three  dimensions.  Firstly,
infrastructure  deficiencies  preserve  subsistence
agriculture model of society which, in turn, leads to
demographic pressures and eventually related with
them conflicts. Secondly, infrastructure deficiencies
also cause growth in (illegal) artisanal mining which
in  realities  of  weak  Congolese  state  creates  a
breeding ground for armed groups’ being. Thirdly,
poor state of transport infrastructure prevents rapid
deployment of security forces if a contingency arises.
Subsistence agriculture model which implies that
‘peasants…  grow  what  they  eat,  build  their  own
houses, and live without regularly making purchases
in the marketplace’ [20, p. 8] is totally dominant in
the DRC. It comprises all kinds of activities related,
such as shifting cultivation, slash-and-burn farming,
nomadic herding and intensive subsistence farming.
Transition  to  more  productive  agricultural
techniques is crippled by infrastructural problems,
first of all, by transport infrastructure. The areas in
proximity  to  waterways  are  in  a  relatively
advantageous position due to poor state of roads or
their absence is mostly compensated by transport
capabilities of rivers and lakes. 
Meanwhile, the landlocked areas suffer transport
deficiencies in full. Inadequate state of roads makes
transportation costs so high that farming oriented to
selling agricultural products, especially for export,
becomes unremunerative. Extremely poor state of
roads in the DRC prevents exchange of goods and
subsequently division of labour. It creates low basis for
taxation and leads to a shrinkage of budgets in turn.
The outcome is inability to provide satisfactory public
services, first of all, building and rehabilitation of
infrastructure.  Underpayment  of  tax  collectors,
especially those who collect taxes on road checkpoints
(these taxes are usually for funding maintenance of
roads), motivates corruption among collectors and
prevents  budgets  from  incomes.  Illegal  taxation
practices, especially on dreadful paths, only flame
grievances to the state. Weakness of security forces
and subsequent security problems, such as armed
groups’  emergence,  are  the  direct  causes  of
underfunding and dire conditions the population lives.
Also, a poor state of transport infrastructure cripples
transportation of military personnel and relevant
supplies, eventually preventing security forces to react
quickly to outbursts of violence [4, p. 699].
Another  problem  caused  by  infrastructure
deficiencies  and  subsequently  by  subsistence
agriculture  model  is  demographic  pressures.
Infrastructure  deficiencies  not  only  create  low
taxation basis and shrink budget incomes as was
mentioned above. They also prevent farmers from
accumulating  necessary  funds  to  rationalize  and
extend  production.  Mechanization  of  agriculture,
construction  of  facilities  for  preservation  and
processing  agricultural  products  become
unaffordable  as  well  as  relevant  educational
opportunities. Inability to save a sum of money to
buy a tractor or truck motivates a peasant to extend
production  by  traditional  methods  -  through
increase in workforce. This trend is clearly visible as
the country’s population roughly doubles every 25
years  [17].  And  the  population  growth  rates
intensified throughout the post-independence period
despite  wars,  economic  and  infrastructural
degradation  [17].  Actually,  the  infrastructural
degradation only increased the demand in labour
force.
Demographic pressures, in turn, became a source
of numerous problems of the Congolese society, such
as land, communal and ethnic conflicts as well as
educational  and  healthcare  systems’  disbalances.
Extreme share of young population or  youth bulge
became an issue by itself. The share of population in
the Congo below the age of 15 has not been less than
45% and the number of children per woman less than
5,98 since 1950 [17]. 
According to Gunnar Heinsohn, when 30 to 40%
of the males of a nation are from 15 to 29 years old, or
in  fighting age, youth bulge occurs [10, p. 16]. It
follows  periods  with  total  fertility  rates  of  4-8
children or 2-4 sons per woman with 15-29-year
delay. Thus, a father should leave 2-4 social positions
instead of one to guarantee appropriate wellbeing of
his sons - the goal difficult to achieve. Since society
cannot  produce  respectable  positions  so  quickly,
more ‘angry young men’ appear and are biased to
transform their anger into violence. 
The above mentioned conditions perfectly match
the situation in the DRC where the high number of
№ 8 ● 2019 АЗИЯ И АФРИКА сегодня 45
unemployed  youth  offers  armed  groups  an
inexhaustible source for recruitment of combatants.
The reservation wage of these young people is very
low as they have no alternative income generating
opportunities [13, p. 29].
Potentially, negative implications of demographic
pressures  can  be  successfully  addressed  by
infrastructural  development  which  may  be  both
extensive  and  intensive.  Simple  rehabilitation  of
existing ramshackle roads may increase productivity
of households and eventually contribute to reduction
of  demand  in  labour  force.  Thus,  demographic
pressures  and  violence  may  be  decreased
subsequently. Also, infrastructural projects create
significant  amount  of  workplaces  that  constrain
unemployment  and  may  have  positive  security
implications.
Another extensive way of addressing transport
infrastructure  deficiencies,  demographic  pressures
and eventually violence is building new roads. The
current tribal/land conflicts in the country are for
the  territories  which  are  accessed  by  existing
infrastructure. Thus, simple increase of road network
may help to accommodate more people. Congo’s vast
spaces  are  mostly  unexplored  and  the  country’s
population  density  is  relatively  low  -  only
34.8 per km2,  though  conflict  regions  mostly
experience  higher  densities.  Nevertheless,  the
experiences of neighbouring Uganda (157 per km2)
and  Rwanda  (445 per km2)  showed  that
demographic pressures can be addressed successfully
by extended transport infrastructure creation.
Finally, infrastructure deficiencies and preserved
by them backward agriculture model provoke rise in
artisanal mining which contributes to violence in
turn. The backbone of this link is transportation
costs. As it was mentioned above, poor state of
transport  network  increases  transportation  costs
drastically. This makes profits of peasants who grow
their crops for sale miserable. Thus, in areas endowed
with  easily  extractable  and  easily  transportable
minerals (gold, diamonds, coltan and cassiterite), the
population looks for gaining better profits through
involvement in mining activities. Extraction of these
resources does not require significant investments in
mining sites construction. Transportation costs are
also low while profits are significant. 
The problem is that the combination of a weak
state and abundance in natural resources creates
opportunities  for  different  agents  (internal  and
external) to take advantage of the power vacuum to
exploit  natural  resources  [13,  p. 22].  Also,  such
mining sites quickly become objectives of parties and
means of their financing. Different ethnic groups and
associated with them militias start to claim them and
use force to support such claims, adding ethnical
dimension  to  conflicts.  An  intervention  of
governmental forces is often considered by other
belligerents as meddling of outsiders into their local
affairs and fighting continues already against the
invaders.
As roads and other infrastructure make up an
important part of public expenditure, their length
and  state  may  serve  also  as  an  indicator  of
importance  attached  by  state  government  to  a
particular region [4, p. 699]. A poorly developed
transportation network in one area in comparison
with  other  ones  is  ‘a  possible  sign  of  political
marginalization  and  strained  relations  with  the
capital  region’  [4,  p. 698].  These  infrastructural
deficiencies and disbalances contribute both to antistate
  grievances  and  to  a  general  feeling  of
abandonment which can encourage violent self-help
strategies.  These  grievances  are  even  more
aggravated by historical ‘resource nationalism’ in
some regions (for example in Katanga and Sud-
Kasai).  Thus,  at  the  country  level,  the  lack  of
infrastructure became not just an economic problem,
but a political challenge endangering the unity of the
DRC [9, p. 57].
To sum up, the central argument of the paper is
that infrastructural deficiencies play significant (if
not  the  central)  role  in  DRC  violence.  Three
theoretical  propositions  which  require  to  be
supported statistically are listed hereunder:
1.  Infrastructural  deficiencies  correlate  with
violence.
2.  Infrastructural  deficiencies  correlate  with
demographic pressures.
3. Advanced infrastructure prevents violence by
compensation of shortage of land.
RESEARCH DESIGN, DATA ACQUISITION,
DATA PROCESSING AND STATISTICS
Overall research design
The  main  idea  of  the  research  was  to  establish
possible  correlation  between  level  of  violence  and
level  of  development/degradation  of  infrastructure
in DRC conflict zones. To achieve this aim there was
collected  data  about  violence  in  the  country,
established  territories  (administrative  territorial
units  which  form  up  provinces)  affected,  and  the
data  was  structured  the  way  that  there  was  a
standard  dossier  for  each  territory.  The  dossier
contained  a  list  of  violent  events  with  counted
results  (numbers  of  killed,  wounded,  abducted,
internally displaced etc.). 
The  next  step  was  collection  of  data  about
infrastructure  (lengths  and  conditions  of  roads,
railways,  waterways,  numbers  of  schools  and
hospitals  etc.)  on  violence  affected  territories.
46 АЗИЯ И АФРИКА сегодня№ 8 ● 2019
Additionally, there was collected the same kind of
data regarding infrastructure on some neighbouring
peaceful territories, so there was formed the control
group.  The  sets  of  data  about  violence  and
infrastructure  were  scored  applying  the  same
standards after. Thus, it became possible to establish
shares of each territory in overall violence and in
overall  infrastructure.  By  juxtaposing  shares  of
violence,  infrastructure,  population  and  land  it
became possible to establish correlations between
them. 
The research embraced time period of 40 months -
from January 2015 to April 2018. Firstly, the logic of
the  time  choice  was  that  the  country  did  not
experience any significant outside meddling in its
affairs within the period, so the violence was almost
intrastate. Secondly, it was manageable to acquire
data  regarding  level  of  violence  and  state  of
infrastructure in different territories for the period.
Problems in acquisition of violence data
Author’s personal experience of being part of the
MONUSCO  showed  that  the  mission  lacked
statistics regarding violence outbreaks in a format
required  for  the  research.  Other  UN  agencies’
reports,  such  as  those  of  the  UNHCR  and  the
OCHA, in spite of certain usefulness also generally
did not qualify the criteria.
Another primary source of information regarding
violence could have been the Armed Forces of the
DRC  or  FARDC,  but  it  appeared  that  the
governmental  body  also  did  not  have  required
statistics.  Uppsala Conflict Data Program (UCDP),
an international peace and conflict research platform
which  generates  statistics  about  fatalities  in
conflicts,  was  also  rejected  as  it  did  not  count
wounded,  raped,  abducted,  internally  displaced
people and other violent occurrences.
After all the mentioned above potential sources of
statistics were screened and rejected, there was taken
decision  to  use  Radio  Okapi,  a  MONUSCO
sponsored  Congolese  news  agency,  as  a  primary
source of data for creation of the database of violent
events. The first reason why Radio Okapi was chosen
was that it was possible to compare its reports with
actual situation on the ground. Secondly, the news
agency was a relatively independent, presumably
non-biased source of information. Mostly, it was due
to the fact that  Radio Okapi was sponsored and
protected by the UN. Thirdly, the source was broadly
recognized even outside the country.
The process of creation of the violence database
required for the research comprised the following.
Firstly,  there  were  read  and  processed  all  news
published on  Radio Okapi website which pertained
to violence in the country for the chosen period. Each
violent occurrence was reflected by an entry in the
database  with  the  following  parameters:  date,
territory, belligerents and outcome. The second step
was to score the outcome of each violent event
applying the same standards. Summing all the scores
of the database and counting all the scores for a
particular territory it became possible to establish
the share of overall violence each territory had. The
third  step  was  creation  of  derivative  statistics
required for the research.
Problems in acquisition of infrastructure data
The only source of available statistics or data for
compiling statistics about the state of infrastructure
in territories was the website of  CAID (fr. Cellule
d’Analyses  des  Indicateurs  de  Developpement),  a
governmental statistical organ. Despite the option of
downloading required statistics, the reality was that
the  statistics  presented  on  the  website  was
structured with significant errors and was considered
not useful for the research.
Nevertheless,  the  website  contained  required
non-structured data about territories, such as their
population and territory (km2), number of primary
and  secondary  schools,  universities,  vocational
facilities,  health  centres  and  hospitals.
The structured data about transport infrastructure
(roads, railways and waterways’ infrastructure) was
unreadable,  but  the  website  contained  maps  of
territories. There was conducted manual metering on
these maps to get necessary statistics about transport
infrastructure: length and state of roads and railways,
length of waterways etc.
For the research there were selected maps of 55
territories,  including  45  territories  affected  by
violence.  The  remaining  10  suffered  significantly
lesser violence or were in peace, but had borders with
territories in conflict. These 10 maps were selected
randomly, but each from a different province. Thus,
they filled the control group.
There  was  collected  data  about  transport
infrastructure,  educational  infrastructure  and
healthcare  infrastructure  for  each  territory.  The
collected data about infrastructures was structured
in a table and scored with same standards. Each
territory received a number of infrastructure points
for its infrastructures. Summing all the scores of
database and counting all the scores for a particular
territory there was established a share of overall
infrastructure each territory had.
Statistics usage
After  the  required  statistics  about  violence,
infrastructure and other parameters was extracted
and distilled for each territory, it became possible to
mould  this  data  into  different  sets  to  establish
№ 8 ● 2019 АЗИЯ И АФРИКА сегодня 47
correlations between them. It allowed defining the
role infrastructure played in violence outbreaks for
each  territory.  Secondly,  it  created  space  for
engagement with academic literature about DRC
conflicts and peace research in general.
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
The data presented in Table 1 reflects distribution
of shares of violence, population, infrastructure and
land  among  territories  grouped  into  quintiles
according their share of violence (1Q - the most
violent territories and 5Q - the least ones).
As it is seen from  Table 1, there is no strict
correlation between share of violence and difference
between  share  of  population  and  share  of
infrastructure. Neither there is a strict correlation
between share of violence and difference between share
of population and share of land. This can be explained
by presence of factors different from infrastructure and
land  deficiencies  in  formation  of  violence-prone
environment.  Nonetheless,  there  is  a  general
correlation which is also better seen if the territories
are grouped into quintiles according their density of
violence (% of violence per 1% of land) - Table 2.
Correlations  are  worse  if  the  territories  are
grouped  into  quintiles  according  their  share  of
violence per share of population (% of violence per
1% of population) - Table 3. Possible interference of
factors different from infrastructure deficiencies and
demographic pressures is seen: it is 3Q which has the
worst  disproportions.  The  general  dependencies
48 АЗИЯ И АФРИКА сегодня№ 8 ● 2019
Source: author’s research project statistics.
Table 2
Distribution of shares of violence, population, infrastructure and land among territories
grouped into quintiles according to their density of violence (% of violence per 1% of land)
Source: author’s research project statistics.
Table 1
Distribution of shares of violence, population, infrastructure and land among territories
grouped into quintiles according to their share of violence
though are still vivid if 1Q and 2Q are compared with
4Q and 5Q.
The  general  correlations  between  share  of
violence and difference between share of population
and share of infrastructure as well as between share
of  violence  and  difference  between  share  of
population and share of land are present. Especially,
it is vivid if 1Q and 5Q are compared in all tables. It
is also seen in 5Qs in all tables that land size plays a
lesser  role  than  availability  of  advanced
infrastructure in violence prevention.
Figure 1 visualizes  infrastructure  and  land
inequalities  of  territories  ranged  according  their
share  of  violence.  As  it  is  seen,  generally,  the
territories with infrastructure and land deficiencies
are prone to conflicts. 
A stronger correlation is seen in  Figure 2 where
the territories were ranged according their density of
violence (% of violence per 1% of land).
A weak correlation is seen in Figure 3 where the
territories  were  ranged  according  their  share  of
violence per share of population (% of violence per
1% of population).
Figure 4 which is the overlay of Figure 1, Figure 2
and Figure 3 is the concentrated graphical output of
the research. It represents the data received from the
№ 8 ● 2019 АЗИЯ И АФРИКА сегодня 49
Figure 1. Territories per violence share and their infrastructure and land inequalities.
Source: author’s research project statistics.
Source: author’s research project statistics.
Table 3
Distribution of shares of violence, population, infrastructure and land among territories grouped
into quintiles according to their share of violence per share of population
(% of violence per 1% of population)
50 АЗИЯ И АФРИКА сегодня№ 8 ● 2019
review  of  approximately  1000  news  reports,
measurements of 55 maps of DRC territories and
screening dozens of web-pages.
As  it  is  seen  in  Figure 4,  there  is  a  general
correlation  between  violence  and  infrastructure
deficiencies. The most violent territories (on the left)
generally  have  positive  differences  between
population share and infrastructure share while the
opposite is seen on the right where the least violent
territories are. Thus, the results contribute to the
first theoretical proposition of the paper which says
that  infrastructural  deficiencies  correlate  with
violence in the DRC.
A  weaker  correlation  between  violence  and
difference between population share and land share is
also  seen  in  Figure 4.  Nevertheless,  the  diagram
Figure 3. Territories per share of violence per share of population (% of violence per 1% of population) and
their infrastructure and land inequalities.
Source: author’s research project statistics.
Figure 2. Territories per violence density (% of violence per 1% of land) and their infrastructure and land
inequalities.
Source: author’s research project statistics.
№ 8 ● 2019 АЗИЯ И АФРИКА сегодня 51
supports the second theoretical proposition of the
paper which says that infrastructural deficiencies
correlate with demographic pressures. It is seen on
the left that land deficiencies correlate with extreme
violence while on the right it is seen that moderate
availability  of  land  is  compensated  by  extended
infrastructure.  This  contributes  to  the  third
theoretical proposition of the paper which says that
advanced  infrastructure  prevents  violence  by
compensating shortage of land.
Though the presence of factors different from
infrastructure  and  land  deficiencies  is  seen,  the
general  correlations  confirm  all  three  theoretical
propositions and the general argument of the article
which  is  that  infrastructural  deficiencies  play
significant (if not the central) role in DRC violence.
CONCLUSION
The paper was an attempt to explain conflicts in
Congo  statistically  and  establish  the  role  of
infrastructure  in  formation  of  violence-prone
environment.  To  achieve  this  goal  there  was
conducted extensive research project. The result of
the project was the relevant statistical information
which supported the theoretical propositions had
been  made.  It  was  proved  that  infrastructural
deficiencies play important role in violence in the
DRC.  In  fact,  these  deficiencies  might  be  the
cornerstone  of  the  current  state  of  conflict  and
addressing them may be a remedy for the country.
The strong part of the article, besides employment
of quantitative methods, is that it scrutinised the
conflict in the DRC from infrastructural perspective.
This fact makes the paper a pioneer in a relatively
new area of conflict studies dedicated to what is
called  infrastructural  violence.  Meanwhile,  the
statistics used in the article is mostly based on data
collected from a news agency (though a respectable
one) and a governmental body which is presumably
poorly  financed.  The data-processing  techniques
mostly  relied  on  common  sense  rather  than  on
standard methods (whether there are any applicable
to  the  case).  Thus,  discovering  new,  more
trustworthy  sources  of  data  and  application  of
specialized  techniques  for  data-processing  may
correct  the  statistics.  This  in  turn  can  help  to
indicate better the place of infrastructure in Congo
conflicts.  Broader  timeframes  can  be  grasped  to
establish better correlations.